[oneMKL][DFT] Full revision of DFT parts of specs + addition of {F,B}WD_STRIDES configuration parameters (#506)
oneapi-src/oneAPI-spec: source/elements/oneMKL/source/domains/dft/config_params/data_layouts.rst

> .. SPDX-FileCopyrightText: 2019-2020 Intel Corporation

Author: changed it

..
.. SPDX-License-Identifier: CC-BY-4.0

.. _onemkl_dft_config_data_layouts:

Configuration of Data Layouts
-----------------------------

The DFT interface provides the configuration parameters
``config_param::FWD_STRIDES`` (resp. ``config_param::BWD_STRIDES``) and
``config_param::FWD_DISTANCE`` (resp. ``config_param::BWD_DISTANCE``) to define

> the data layouts used in forward (resp. backward) domain. Considering the

Author: Revised in [commit b9c23f0](b9c23f0b042a7737ab52722b92cf867bffc8d6b9), please let me know if you're ok with it (thumbs-up) or comment.

:math:`m`-th (:math:`m \geq 0`) :math:`d`-dimensional

> :math:`n_{1}\times n_{2} \times\dots\times n_d` data set :math:`X` in forward

Author: Revised in [commit 70fdf00](70fdf00b362edf3d663d867b53f0fd5b1ef48baf), please let me know if you're ok with it (thumbs-up) or comment.

(resp. backward) domain, those configuration parameters describe that a

> particular element :math:`X^{m}_{k_{1}, k_{2}, \dots, k_d }` is located at index

Author: I can clarify that

> particular element :math:`X^{m}_{k_{1}, k_{2}, \dots, k_d }` is located at index

Author: Done in [eaef65a283fd20a0cf6a698311069c19bfef6854](https://github.com/oneapi-src/oneAPI-spec/pull/506/commits/eaef65a283fd20a0cf6a698311069c19bfef6854)

> particular element :math:`X^{m}_{k_{1}, k_{2}, \dots, k_d }` is located at index

Reviewer: Looks ok, but I can not resolve conversations on this repo.

.. math::
    s_0 + k_1*s_1 + k_2*s_2 + \dots + k_d*s_d + m*l

>     :label: eq_idx_data_layout

Reviewer: ok

of the corresponding data container (``sycl::buffer`` or USM pointer) provided
to the compute function, the data type of which is (possibly implicitly
re-interpreted) as documented in the
:ref:`table<onemkl_dft_config_data_element_types>` below. In the index
expression :eq:`eq_idx_data_layout`,

> - :math:`s_j`, :math:`0 \leq j \leq d` represents the :ref:`generalized strides and offset<onemkl_dft_fwd_bwd_strides>` within :math:`d`-dimensional data sets in forward (resp. backward) domain, in number of elements of the :ref:`relevant elementary data type<onemkl_dft_config_data_element_types>`;

Author: Changed it entirely, please let me know if you're ok with it (thumbs-up) or comment.

- :math:`l` represents the :ref:`distance<onemkl_dft_fwd_bwd_distance>` between successive :math:`d`-dimensional data sets in forward (resp. backward) domain, in number of elements of the :ref:`relevant elementary data type<onemkl_dft_config_data_element_types>`;

.. container:: section

   .. _onemkl_dft_config_data_element_types:

>    .. rubric:: Elementary data type assumed by descriptors depending on their type and configuration (precision matching the :ref:`descriptor's<onemkl_dft_enum_precision>`)

Reviewer 2: In the html file this isn't really formatted like a header, and it looks a little weird to me as a sentence fragment. Maybe a colon at the end? Or a full sentence like "The following table lists the elementary data type..."?

Author: Changed it entirely, please let me know if you're ok with it (thumbs-up) or comment.

   .. list-table::
        :header-rows: 1
        :class: longtable

        * -   Descriptor configuration
          -   Element type of forward data
          -   Element type of backward data
        * -   ``COMPLEX`` template :ref:`onemkl_dft_enum_domain` and :ref:`onemkl_dft_complex_storage_complex_complex`
          -   Complex
          -   Complex
        * -   ``COMPLEX`` template :ref:`onemkl_dft_enum_domain` and :ref:`onemkl_dft_complex_storage_real_real`
          -   Real
          -   Real
        * -   ``REAL`` template :ref:`onemkl_dft_enum_domain`, :ref:`onemkl_dft_real_storage_real_real` and :ref:`onemkl_dft_conjugate_even_storage_complex_complex`
          -   Real
          -   Complex

.. _onemkl_dft_fwd_bwd_strides:

.. rubric:: FWD_STRIDE and BWD_STRIDES

> The values :math:`s_0, s_1, \dots, s_d` in :eq:`eq_idx_data_layout` here above

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The values :math:`s_0, s_1, \dots, s_d` in :eq:`eq_idx_data_layout` above
```

are communicated as elements, in that order, of a :math:`(d+1)`-long
``std::vector<std::int64_t>`` value for the configuration parameter
``config_param::FWD_STRIDES`` (resp. ``config_param::BWD_STRIDES``). The element
:math:`s_0` represents an absolute offset (or "displacement") in the data set(s)

> while the subsequent element(s) :math:`s_j\ (j > 0)` are generalized strides.

Reviewer: ok

The default values set for the forward and backward strides correspond to the
data layout configurations for unbatched, in-place transforms using unit stride
along the leading dimension with no offset (and minimal padding in forward
domain in case of descriptors of ``REAL`` template :ref:`onemkl_dft_enum_domain`,
aligning with the :ref:`requirements for in-place
transforms<onemkl_dft_data_layout_requirements>`). In other words, the default

> values are :math:`s_0 = 0`, :math:`s_d = 1` and, for multi-dimensional

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
values are :math:`s_0 = 0`, :math:`s_d = 1` and, for :math:`d`-dimensional
```

Author: changed it to $d$-dimensional DFTs with $d > 1$.

> transforms, *i.e.*, if :math:`d > 1`,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
transforms with :math:`d > 1`,
```
Taking Finlay's suggestion above, I'd simplify this next clause a bit too.

- :math:`s_{d-1} = n_{d}` for descriptors of ``COMPLEX`` template :ref:`onemkl_dft_enum_domain`;

- :math:`s_{d-1} = \alpha \left(\lfloor \frac{n_{d}}{2} \rfloor + 1\right)`, wherein :math:`\alpha = 2` (resp. :math:`\alpha = 1`) for forward (resp. backward) strides, of descriptors of ``REAL`` template :ref:`onemkl_dft_enum_domain`;

and :math:`s_k = n_{k+1} * s_{k+1}` for :math:`1 \leq k < d - 1` if :math:`d > 2`.

.. _onemkl_dft_fwd_bwd_distance:

.. rubric:: FWD_DISTANCE and BWD_DISTANCE

> The value :math:`l` in :eq:`eq_idx_data_layout` here above is communicated as an

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The value :math:`l` in :eq:`eq_idx_data_layout` above is communicated as an
```

:eq:`eq_idx_data_layout` corresponds to a *unique* (relevant) data point in the
data set under consideration. In other words, there must not be one index value
as expressed in :eq:`eq_idx_data_layout` corresponding to two different
:math:`(d+1)`-tuples :math:`(m, k_{1}, k_{2}, \dots, k_d)` within valid range,
*i.e.*, such that

- :math:`0 \leq m < M` wherein :math:`M` is the :ref:`number of transforms<onemkl_dft_config_number_of_transforms>`;

- :math:`0 \leq k_j < n_j`, :math:`1 \leq j < d`;

- :math:`0 \leq k_d < n_d`, for descriptors of ``COMPLEX`` template :ref:`onemkl_dft_enum_domain` or for forward data of descriptors of ``REAL`` template :ref:`onemkl_dft_enum_domain`;

- :math:`0 \leq k_d \leq \lfloor\frac{n_d}{2}\rfloor`, for backward data of descriptors of ``REAL`` template :ref:`onemkl_dft_enum_domain`.

Additionally, for in-place transforms (``PLACEMENT=INPLACE``), the forward and backward data
layouts must be configured *consistently* with one another, that is,

- for descriptors of ``COMPLEX`` template :ref:`onemkl_dft_enum_domain`, strides and distances must be equal in forward and backward domain;

> - for descriptors of ``REAL`` template :ref:`onemkl_dft_enum_domain` with :ref:`onemkl_dft_real_storage_real_real` and :ref:`onemkl_dft_conjugate_even_storage_complex_complex`, considering any :math:`(d+1)`-tuple :math:`(m, k_{1}, k_{2}, \dots, k_{d-1}, 0)` within valid range (as explicited above), the index value :eq:`eq_idx_data_layout` in forward domain must be twice the corresponding index value for the same tuple in backward domain.

Reviewer 2: Why does the offset have to be zero for real transform consistency? Wouldn't the same sort of (forward s0) = 2*(backward s0) condition work?

> - for descriptors of ``REAL`` template :ref:`onemkl_dft_enum_domain` with :ref:`onemkl_dft_real_storage_real_real` and :ref:`onemkl_dft_conjugate_even_storage_complex_complex`, considering any :math:`(d+1)`-tuple :math:`(m, k_{1}, k_{2}, \dots, k_{d-1}, 0)` within valid range (as explicited above), the index value :eq:`eq_idx_data_layout` in forward domain must be twice the corresponding index value for the same tuple in backward domain.

Author: @t4c1, how about [204701ebda98958a08ef41c76fc1e990be0bfbde](https://github.com/oneapi-src/oneAPI-spec/pull/506/commits/204701ebda98958a08ef41c76fc1e990be0bfbde)?
@hparks-intel, I believe you're right: my bad, last time I used offsets was in another life... How about [1a2b133b52e1b190c6a23267434a4588f4342c5c](https://github.com/oneapi-src/oneAPI-spec/pull/506/commits/1a2b133b52e1b190c6a23267434a4588f4342c5c)?

> - for descriptors of ``REAL`` template :ref:`onemkl_dft_enum_domain` with :ref:`onemkl_dft_real_storage_real_real` and :ref:`onemkl_dft_conjugate_even_storage_complex_complex`, considering any :math:`(d+1)`-tuple :math:`(m, k_{1}, k_{2}, \dots, k_{d-1}, 0)` within valid range (as explicited above), the index value :eq:`eq_idx_data_layout` in forward domain must be twice the corresponding index value for the same tuple in backward domain.

Reviewer: I think the new wording might have some loopholes. Added a few more comments on that.

> - for descriptors of ``REAL`` template :ref:`onemkl_dft_enum_domain` with :ref:`onemkl_dft_real_storage_real_real` and :ref:`onemkl_dft_conjugate_even_storage_complex_complex`, considering any :math:`(d+1)`-tuple :math:`(m, k_{1}, k_{2}, \dots, k_{d-1}, 0)` within valid range (as explicited above), the index value :eq:`eq_idx_data_layout` in forward domain must be twice the corresponding index value for the same tuple in backward domain.

Author: @t4c1 and @hparks-intel, I'm resolving this outdated thread: let's continue the conversations in the new, up-to-date comments.

If specifying the data layout strides using these deprecated configuration
parameters and if the strides differ in forward and backward domain, the
descriptor *must* be re-configured and re-committed for computing the DFT in the
:ref:`reverse direction<onemkl_dft_formula>` as shown below.

.. code-block:: cpp

   // ...
   desc.set_value(config_param::INPUT_STRIDES,  fwd_domain_strides);
   desc.set_value(config_param::OUTPUT_STRIDES, bwd_domain_strides);
   desc.commit(queue);
   compute_forward(desc, ...);
   // ...
   desc.set_value(config_param::INPUT_STRIDES,  bwd_domain_strides);
   desc.set_value(config_param::OUTPUT_STRIDES, fwd_domain_strides);
   desc.commit(queue);
   compute_backward(desc, ...);

Setting either of ``config_param::FWD_STRIDES`` or ``config_param::BWD_STRIDES``
triggers any previously-set values for ``config_param::INPUT_STRIDES`` or
``config_param::OUTPUT_STRIDES`` to be wiped out, and vice versa. As a
consequence, mix-and-matching either of ``config_param::INPUT_STRIDES`` or
``config_param::OUTPUT_STRIDES`` with either of ``config_param::FWD_STRIDES`` or
``config_param::BWD_STRIDES`` is **not** to be supported and would result in an

> exception being thrown at commit time due to invalid configuration, if attempted.

Reviewer 4: I think this contradicts with the previous sentence since you are saying that setting `(FWD|BWD)_STRIDES` wipes out any previous value set with `(INPUT|OUTPUT)_STRIDES`. That would mean the descriptor has to remember that an exception needs to be thrown in `set_value` and throw it later at commit time. I think it would be easier to debug for a user and simpler to implement if the exception is thrown in `set_value`.
Also what is the point of wiping out the other values in this case?

Author: Well, the intention was to actually **not** burden ourselves with such convoluted logic that would intend to keep track of what was done or not, in which order and, if what was done doesn't make sense to us somehow at some point throw right away (before even getting to `commit`) for the sole purpose of supporting (in part) something that we are actually deprecating along with a new feature. Usually the full configuration settings are required to determine whether a configuration is consistent or not so a strategy to throw before `commit` could quickly become nightmare-ish to define, let alone implement.
I can see how the suggested wording might be ambiguous though and I would suggest the following alternative, if desired: " As a consequence, setting either of ``config_param::INPUT_STRIDES`` or ``config_param::OUTPUT_STRIDES`` along with either of ``config_param::FWD_STRIDES`` or ``config_param::BWD_STRIDES`` must **not** to be supported and would result in an exception being thrown at commit time due to invalid configuration, if attempted."
Please let me know if you'd like that and if you agree with it.

More details:
--------------
To successfully commit, the descriptor must be fully aware of the intended data layouts in either domain and those must abide by the general consistency requirements (possibly only for one compute direction if using `(IN|OUT)PUT_STRIDES`). During the deprecation period, the users would have the choice to communicate them
- either via `(F|B)WD_STRIDES`;
- or via `(IN|OUT)PUT_STRIDES`;

but not via one of each couple of parameters, for instance.

In other words, what is meant to be conveyed here is that one may choose either couple of configuration parameters but **not** mix-n-match. For instance, a user attempting to configure a descriptor for a backward transform using something like 
`desc.set_value(config_param::INPUT_STRIDES, ...);`
`desc.set_value(config_param::FWD_STRIDES, ...);`
`desc.commit(...);`
would receive 1) a warning message from the first operation advising them to prefer `(F|B)WD_STRIDES` over `(IN,OUT)PUT_STRIDES` (see following paragraph), 2) an exception thrown at commit time due to inconsistent configuration. Why? Because the second operation wipes out what the first operation did set, resulting in fwd strides being the only strides defined and set internally (Note: the default backward strides would be wiped out by the first operation here above and left unset thereafter). As a result, there is not couple of strides (internally) that satisfies the "general consistency requirement" specified above, therefore the descriptor is not properly configured and it can't commit: an error must be thrown at commit.

The rationale here is to force users to not mix-n-match during the deprecation period. While the above example could arguably be valid for a backward dft thereafter, it would not be for a forward dft. The motivation for introducing `(F|B)WD_STRIDES` and deprecating `(IN|OUT)PUT_STRIDES` was precisely to avoid this kind of ill-defined descriptor that can commit to one direction only.

If not opting for such a protocol, there are many more possible use case scenarii that could or could not make sense and would or would not be ill-defined, for instance
 1) 
`desc.set_value(config_param::INPUT_STRIDES, a);`
`desc.set_value(config_param::FWD_STRIDES, c);`
`desc.set_value(config_param::OUTPUT_STRIDES, b);`
`desc.set_value(config_param::BWD_STRIDES, d);`
where `c != a`, `c != b`, `d != a`, `d != b`. Which strides are to be used/considered at commit in that case? Which `set_value` should throw if any?
2) 
`desc.set_value(config_param::INPUT_STRIDES, a);`
`desc.set_value(config_param::OUTPUT_STRIDES, b);`
`// fwd and bwd strides not set but also left to their default values if not wiped`
where `default_fwd != a`, `default_fwd != b`, `default_bwd != a`, `default_bwd != b`. Which strides are to be used/considered at commit in that case? Which `set_value` should throw if any?
3) etc.

In such cases, the suggested protocol clarifies what's expected to happen/be implemented, in my opinion.

Reviewer 4: I completely agree that we need some way to prevent the user from mix-and-matching the 2 strides configs. Thinking about it some more I have a slightly different suggestion, we could wipe the other stride config as you suggest but throw the exception in `set_value`. To compare the 2 suggestions with your examples:

1)
```quote
desc.set_value(config_param::INPUT_STRIDES, a);
desc.set_value(config_param::FWD_STRIDES, c);
desc.set_value(config_param::OUTPUT_STRIDES, b);
desc.set_value(config_param::BWD_STRIDES, d);
where c != a, c != b, d != a, d != b
```
- With your original proposal, the third `set_value` wipes `fwd_strides` and `bwd_strides` and the fourth `set_value` wipes `input_strides` and `output_strides`. At commit time the descriptor ends up with only `bwd_strides` set to some values. The descriptor can figure out that an exception needs to be thrown in this case. It cannot know whether the user set `fwd_strides` to an empty vector or if it was wiped because of setting `INPUT_STRIDES` or `OUTPUT_STRIDES`.
- With my new suggestion, the first `set_value` is valid and it wipes `fwd_strides` and `bwd_strides`. The second `set_value` sees that `fwd_strides` are wiped, the exception is thrown now. The user gets the exception earlier.

2)
```quote
desc.set_value(config_param::INPUT_STRIDES, a);
desc.set_value(config_param::OUTPUT_STRIDES, b);
// fwd and bwd strides not set but also left to their default values if not wiped
where default_fwd != a, default_fwd != b, default_bwd != a, default_bwd != b
```
- With your original proposal, at commit time the descriptor needs to check a boolean to understand that `fwd_strides` and `bwd_strides` are wiped but no exception need to be thrown i.e. the user didn't try to set `fwd_strides` and `bwd_strides` before setting `input_strides`, `output_strides`. It's simple to deduce that `input_strides` and `output_strides` must be used.
- With my new suggestion, the situation is the same than with your proposal except that no booleans are required.

It seems better to me if we can throw the exception in `set_value` rather than at commit time unless I'm missing something?
In any case, we may also want to add that setting any stride to an empty vector throws an `invalid_argument` exception to avoid misleading error messages.

Reviewer 2: I think double-setting the strides with both INPUT/OUTPUT and FWD/BWD is a configuration consistency problem and should be caught at commit like all other consistency problems. We can't really tell if we wiped the strides to zero or if the customer set the strides to zero themselves and then reset them to the real strides, which would be valid. I think we should keep any errors thrown at `set_value` specific to invalid arguments, like an empty vector.

Author: While I understand that these specs are not meant to be (nor necessarily become) a "documentation" for the closed-source oneMKL library, one cannot deny the fact that whoever wrote them in the first place was (more than) strongly "inspired" by the behavior and design of the closed-source oneMKL library, however questionable that choice was. That might have been in part because I keep hearing "rumors" that closed-source oneMKL will have to become spec-compliant some time "soon" but I don't actually know more details about that. Anyhow, I meant my changes to basically follow the footsteps of that "original author" (unknown to me) in that sense, _i.e._, opting for **not checking anything configuration-related before `commit`**.

As a developer of the closed-source oneMKL library, my understanding is that anything that relates to users calling `set_value` is literally "free game" in the following sense: they can use it however many times they want, possibly overwriting previously set values doing so, so long as their usage is not nonsensical (configuration parameters are valid and configuration values are valid, too). The configuration values themselves, the configuration parameters being set, and the order in which they are set, are not meant to be verified on-the-fly in any way - unless the function itself can't make sense of it all, of course (_e.g._ passing an empty vector in this case, which would be a good reason to make it throw a ``oneapi::mkl::invalid_argument()`` as specified in the section "set_value" [here](https://github.com/oneapi-src/oneAPI-spec/pull/506/files#diff-470a4b58aa08befacab2744e832a278a6b82006af0ecfffdc2fbcb65f4e79660) and in light of the expected nature for the configuration value that is "``std::vector<int64_t>`` of size $(d +1)$", which is now specified in the table of section "config_param" [here](https://github.com/oneapi-src/oneAPI-spec/pull/506/files#diff-f7755a00e2bfac7d58c207c368189519afd876d005d82f8b8fbb61a6d1fded5e)) - since all of the configuration settings "may still change" until `commit` is called.

Please also note that `get_value` is supposed and expected to write the content of a "``std::vector<int64_t>`` of size $(d +1)$" too, now based on those changes, for any `*_STRIDES` configuration parameters being queried, **at any time** (before and/or after ``commit``). Similarly, to `set_value` the usage of `get_value` is supposed to be "free game".

@Rbiessy, I have updated the content of section "Configuring strides for input and output data [deprecated, **not** recommended]" in [here](https://github.com/oneapi-src/oneAPI-spec/pull/506/files#diff-4fcd9e68bb50dac4e5a4ef5d7c13356a18fc518442be75ed916ef8ac1ffc97b0). Please review and let me know if that looks ok to you (with a thumbs-up) or comment. The most notable update is that the wording "wipe(d)" is no longer used but the supposedly-not-used stride configuration values are "reset to `std::vector<std::int64_t>(d+1, 0)`" instead. In light of the updated content therein and the consistency requirements, an exception is to be thrown at `commit` time for both of your example, and no flag is required either for your case no 2.

Finally, I would like to probe everyone's opinion (@hparks-intel, @t4c1, @Rbiessy, @FMarno) on the following question: the specs used to be written in a way that, **for in-place complex descriptors**, the output strides were basically ignored and overwritten by the input strides (see the [last paragraph of this page](https://spec.oneapi.io/versions/latest/elements/oneMKL/source/domains/dft/config_params/strides.html#onemkl-dft-config-strides)). I personally think that is pretty bad and I have (unconsciously) omitted that in my changes so far: does anyone of you want me to re-introduce that in the current changes? Note: if we were to re-introduce it without any additional change, a use case scenario like (`desc` being an in-place complex descriptor)
`desc.set_value(config_param::FWD_STRIDES, a);`
`desc.set_value(config_param::INPUT_STRIDES, c);`
`desc.set_value(config_param::BWD_STRIDES, b);`
`desc.set_value(config_param::OUTPUT_STRIDES, d);`
would lead to an error at commit time but
`desc.set_value(config_param::FWD_STRIDES, a);`
`desc.set_value(config_param::OUTPUT_STRIDES, c);`
`desc.set_value(config_param::BWD_STRIDES, b);`
`desc.set_value(config_param::INPUT_STRIDES, d);`
would not. I don't want to be the person trying to justify that to any user, personally so my personal vote is to **not** re-introduce it.

Reviewer 4: Alright, I understand the idea that `set_value` and `get_value` should be "free game" as you say. I think it can lead to confusing errors at commit time but that's how it is.

I'm also happy with the last paragraph that you mention. It makes sense to allow different `OUTPUT_STRIDES` for in-place transforms IMO.

Reviewer 2: I see your point about potential confusion with the two stride options during the deprecation period, and I'm fine with removing that line for now. It might merit further discussion though about whether "in-place" just means the starting configuration and ending configuration both fit in the same data container, so you could input a column batch and output a row batch to the same memory, or if it means each transform in the batch is truly in-place, which would disallow that sort of transposing the batch. I think the latter was the intent of that provision. It's easier to develop for the scenario where in-place means every transform is in-place, but that doesn't mean it's the best thing for the customers and therefore the spec.

and :math:`s_k = n_{k+1} * s_{k+1}` for :math:`1 \leq k < d - 1` if :math:`d > 2`.

.. _onemkl_dft_fwd_bwd_distance:

.. rubric:: FWD_DISTANCE and BWD_DISTANCE

The value :math:`l` in :eq:`eq_idx_data_layout` here above is communicated as an
``std::int64_t`` value for the configuration parameter
``config_param::FWD_DISTANCE`` (resp. ``config_param::BWD_DISTANCE``). This
configuration parameter is irrelevant for unbatched transforms, *i.e.*, for
descriptors set to handle a
:ref:`number of transforms<onemkl_dft_config_number_of_transforms>` equal to
:math:`1` (default value). The configuration parameters
``config_param::FWD_DISTANCE`` and ``config_param::BWD_DISTANCE`` must be set
for descriptors configured to compute more than one transform, *i.e.*, if the
:ref:`number of transforms<onemkl_dft_config_number_of_transforms>` is larger
than :math:`1`. The default values for ``config_param::FWD_DISTANCE`` and
``config_param::BWD_DISTANCE`` are :math:`0` regardless of the descriptor's

> nature.

Reviewer: Is the change of the default value for distances from 1 to 0 intentional?

Author: Yes it is. The reasoning is to **explicitly require their values to be set** by users in case of batched transforms by setting the default distances to the only values that can't possibly be "consistent" for any batched DFT regardless of the stride values, *i.e.*, $0$. In the form of the specs as updated herein, this is now explicitly specified in the updated table of the "config_param" section of the page entitled "DFT-related scoped enumeration types" and further developed in section "Configuring data layouts for batched transforms" of the page entitled "Configuration of Data Layouts".

The main motivation is that, in my understanding, [rocFFT](https://rocm.docs.amd.com/projects/hipfort/en/docs-5.4.1/doxygen/html/interfacehipfort__rocfft_1_1rocfft__plan__description__set__data__layout.html), [cuFFT](https://docs.nvidia.com/cuda/cufft/index.html#advanced-data-layout), [FFTW](https://www.fftw.org/fftw3_doc/Advanced-Complex-DFTs.html) and even closed-source oneMKL require distances to be explicitly set by users. NB: for closed-source oneMKL, the default value is actually $0$ therefore _indirectly_ requesting users to set the distances in case of batched DFTs (error at commit to expect otherwise). I truly can't explain how this value of $1$ ever made it in here and why...
A secondary motivation is that changing closed-source oneMKL's default behavior for no other reason than aligning it with that value of $1$ (if unchanged) would result in truly nightmare-ish changes as such a default value is a convenient assumption in a lot of algorithm selection checks as they are implemented: they happen to be valid as is too for unbatched transforms if the distances are $0$, _i.e._, if left as default, but would no longer hold if that were to change (requiring seemingly insignificant changes in many if not all algorithm selection checks to prevent performance regressions).

Finally, if there exists reluctance to change this default value to $0$, I don't think that leaving it as $1$ makes sense either: now that we're introducing fwd and bwd strides, we _might_ want to consider a default value that would be appropriate for default strides and in-place operations. But we'd end up in an arguably rather inconvenient state where users would need only ``NUMBER_OF_TRANSFORMS`` to be set for batched real in-place while they'd need to reset ``FWD_DISTANCE``, too, for out-of-place real transforms of standard layout. In my opinion, we might as well make sure that users know that they're expected to set all ``NUMBER_OF_TRANSFORMS`` and ``(F|B)WD_DISTANCE``

Reviewer 2: Just adding my on upvote for this change. Abstractly I think zero's a better choice for both the implementers and the users since it makes the spec requirement that users set the distances algorithmically enforceable. As mentioned, most of the backends already have that requirement.

Reviewer: I was just checking if this is intentional or not. I think arguments for this change are good. 

Although, I would prefer to have this be the value that makes sense for default strides, assuming no gaps in the data.

Author: This could be a sensible choice, too, indeed, except for real in-place and `config_value::INPLACE` is the default value for `config_param::PLACEMENT`. My opinion is that this could deserve a dedicated discussion beyond this PR, I'm suggesting to resolve as is for now, due to time constraints.

``config_value::INPLACE`` associated with configuration parameter
``config_param::PLACEMENT``), the smallest stride value must be associated with
the same dimension in forward and backward domains and the data layouts must
abide by following "*consistency requirement*": the memory address(es) of
leading entry(ies) along the last dimension must be identical in forward and
backward domains. Specifically, considering any :math:`(d+1)`-tuple
:math:`(m, k_{1}, k_{2}, \dots, k_{d-1}, 0)` within :ref:`valid
range<onemkl_dft_elementary_range_of_indices>`, the memory address of the
element of corresponding index value :eq:`eq_idx_data_layout` in forward domain
(considering the :ref:`implicitly assumed
type<onemkl_dft_config_data_implicitly_assumed_elementary_data_type>` in forward
domain) must be identical to the memory address of the element of corresponding
index value :eq:`eq_idx_data_layout` in backward domain (considering the
:ref:`implicitly assumed
type<onemkl_dft_config_data_implicitly_assumed_elementary_data_type>` in
backward domain). Equivalently,

- for complex descriptors, the offset, stride(s) (and distances, if relevant)

>   must be equal in forward and backward domain;

Reviewer 2: Relevant to another discussion here, we are already explicitly disallowing different input/output forward/backward strides for in-place transforms with this comment. So there's no change of behavior implied by removing the line about ignoring certain strides for in-place transforms.

Author: Well, not really... currently something like
`// desc is a fresh newly created 2D complex descriptor for sizes (n1 x n2), set for in-place by default`
`desc.set_value(config_param::INPUT_STRIDES, {0, n2, 1})`
`desc.commit(queue)`
is not expected to break since "output strides are ignored" due to the nature of the descriptor and (current) specified behavior for such in-place DFTs. With the changes herein though, the output strides (all of values 0) would not satisfy the consistency requirement and commit would be expected to fail.

  relevant, must satisfy :math:`l^{\text{fwd}} = 2 l^{\text{bwd}}`. Note that
  this leads to some data padding being required in forward domain if unit
  strides are used along the last dimension in forward and backward domains.

.. _onemkl_dft_io_strides_deprecated:

.. rubric:: Configuring strides for input and output data [deprecated, **not** recommended]

Instead of specifying strides by domain, one may choose to specify the strides
for input and output data sequences. Let
:math:`s^{\text{x}}_{j}, \ j \in \lbrace 0, 1, \ldots, d\rbrace` be the stride
values for input (resp. output) data sequences if :math:`\text{x} = \text{i}`
(resp. :math:`\text{x} = \text{o}`). Such
:math:`s^{\text{x}}_0, s^{\text{x}}_1, \dots, s^{\text{x}}_d` values may be
communicated as elements, in that order, of a :math:`(d+1)`-long
``std::vector<std::int64_t>`` configuration value, set for the (deprecated)
configuration parameter ``config_param::INPUT_STRIDES`` if
:math:`\text{x} = \text{i}` (resp. ``config_param::OUTPUT_STRIDES`` if
:math:`\text{x} = \text{o}`).

The values of :math:`s^{\text{i}}_{j}` and :math:`s^{\text{o}}_{j}` are to be
used and considered by oneMKL if and only if

> :math:`s^{\text{fwd}}_{j} = s^{\text{fwd}}_{j} = 0, \forall j \in \lbrace 0, 1, \ldots, d\rbrace`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
:math:`s^{\text{fwd}}_{j} = s^{\text{bwd}}_{j} = 0, \forall j \in \lbrace 0, 1, \ldots, d\rbrace`.
```
Typo here I think

> The values of :math:`s^{\text{i}}_{j}` and :math:`s^{\text{o}}_{j}` are to be
> used and considered by oneMKL if and only if
> :math:`s^{\text{fwd}}_{j} = s^{\text{bwd}}_{j} = 0, \forall j \in \lbrace 0, 1, \ldots, d\rbrace`.
> In such a case, :ref:`descriptor<onemkl_dft_descriptor>` objects must consider

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The values of :math:`s^{\text{i}}_{j}` and :math:`s^{\text{o}}_{j}` are to be
used and considered by oneMKL if and only if
:math:`s^{\text{fwd}}_{j} = s^{\text{bwd}}_{j} = 0, \forall j \in \lbrace 0, 1, \ldots, d\rbrace`.
(This will happen automatically if ``config_param::INPUT_STRIDES`` and ``config_param::OUTPUT_STRIDES``
are set and ``config_param::FWD_STRIDES`` and ``config_param::BWD_STRIDES`` are not. See note below.)
In such a case, :ref:`descriptor<onemkl_dft_descriptor>` objects must consider
```
I know the note's not far away, but I still think it's nice to explicitly reference it here.

the data layouts corresponding to the two compute directions separately. As

> detailed above, relevant data sequence entries are accessed as element of data

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
detailed above, relevant data sequence entries are accessed as elements of data
```

provided to the compute function, the base data type of which is (possibly
implicitly re-interpreted) as documented in :ref:`this
table<onemkl_dft_config_data_implicitly_assumed_elementary_data_type>`. If using
input and output strides, for any :math:`m` and multi-index
:math:`\left(k_1, k_2, \ldots, k_d\right)` within :ref:`valid
range<onemkl_dft_elementary_range_of_indices>`, the index to be used when
accessing a data sequence entry - or part thereof - in forward domain is

.. math::
    s^{\text{x}}_0 + k_1\ s^{\text{x}}_1 + k_2\ s^{\text{x}}_2 + \dots + k_d\ s^{\text{x}}_d + m\ l^{\text{fwd}}

where :math:`\text{x} = \text{i}` (resp. :math:`\text{x} = \text{o}`) for
forward (resp. backward) DFT(s). Similarly, the index to be used when accessing
a data sequence entry - or part thereof - in backward domain is

.. math::
    s^{\text{x}}_0 + k_1\ s^{\text{x}}_1 + k_2\ s^{\text{x}}_2 + \dots + k_d\ s^{\text{x}}_d + m\ l^{\text{bwd}}

where :math:`\text{x} = \text{o}` (resp. :math:`\text{x} = \text{i}`) for
forward (resp. backward) DFT(s).

As a consequence, configuring :ref:`descriptor<onemkl_dft_descriptor>` objects

> using these deprecated configuration parameters makes their configuration
> possibly direction-dependent (if different stride values are to be used in
> forward and backward domains). Since the intended compute direction is unknown

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
using these deprecated configuration parameters makes their configuration
direction-dependent when different stride values are used in
forward and backward domains. Since the intended compute direction is unknown
```

:math:`(d+1)`-tuples :math:`(m, k_{1}, k_{2}, \dots, k_d)` within valid range,
*i.e.*, such that

.. _onemkl_dft_data_layout_nonredundant_valid_range:

- :math:`0 \leq m < M` wherein :math:`M` is the :ref:`number of transforms<onemkl_dft_config_number_of_transforms>`;

- :math:`0 \leq k_j < n_j`, :math:`1 \leq j < d` if :math:`d > 1` ;

- :math:`0 \leq k_d < n_d`, for descriptors of ``COMPLEX`` template :ref:`onemkl_dft_enum_domain` or for forward data of descriptors of ``REAL`` template :ref:`onemkl_dft_enum_domain`;

- :math:`0 \leq k_d \leq \lfloor\frac{n_d}{2}\rfloor`, for backward data of descriptors of ``REAL`` template :ref:`onemkl_dft_enum_domain`.

Additionally, for in-place transforms (``PLACEMENT=INPLACE``), the forward and
backward data layouts must be configured *consistently* with one another: the

> memory address(es) of leading element(s) along the last dimension must be

Reviewer: Is the last dimension always the one this should be about? Or should it be the dimension with the smallest stride? And I think there should be a requirement that the same dimension has the smallest stride in both domains.

The special cases for existing formats do clarify that, but if we have a general description it should specify the same.

Author: Yes, it is always the last dimension, this is now explicitly specified in section "Finite range of indices" of the landing page (title "Discrete Fourier Transform Functions").

Your comment about "same dimension for smallest stride" is indeed required for in-place transforms (real and complex), *e.g.*, to clarify that something like $\text{fwdstrides} = {0, 2(B/2+1), 2A(B/2+1)}$ and $\text{fwdstrides} = {0, (B/2+1), 1}$ for real in-place is not considered consistent either.

I have just addressed that in [commit bf0048e3](https://github.com/oneapi-src/oneAPI-spec/pull/506/commits/bf0048e32b5b2cde0e1c1c0703e267f8bb2667d2). Please let me know if you agree with that (thumbs up) or comment.

Reviewer: Looks better. 

However, I still have doubts in this always being about the last dimension. What you are proposing right now, for example, allows the following configuration:
real transform, inplace, size: [2,3,5], FWD_STRIDES: [0,1,2,12], BWD_STRIDES: [0,1,2,6]

I assumed that the intention of this requirement was to disallow cases like that that can not be processed line by line (where by line I mean the consecutive elements in the dimension with the smallest stride), as doing it that way would partially overwrite the data not yet processed. Feel free to resolve if that is not the case.

Author: No, it does not because your example uses $d = 3$ and does not satisfy the condition $\text{fwdstrides}\left(\ell\right) = 2\text{bwdstrides}\left(\ell\right)$ for $\ell \in {1, 2}$ (see section "General consistency requirements" in page "Configuration of Data Layouts"), which is precisely meant for ensuring what you point out.

Real transform, inplace, size: [2,3,5], with FWD_STRIDES: [0,**2,4,12**], BWD_STRIDES: [0,1,2,6] can be supported though and since only **every other** real element is meaningful in the forward-domain data container in that case, the relevant data can't be overwritten.

identical in forward and backward domain. Specifically, considering any
:math:`(d+1)`-tuple :math:`(m, k_{1}, k_{2}, \dots, k_{d-1}, 0)` within valid
range (as developed above), the memory address of the element of corresponding
index value :eq:`eq_idx_data_layout` in forward domain (considering the
:ref:`implicitly assumed type<onemkl_dft_config_data_element_types>` in forward

> domain) must be identical to the memory address of the element of corresponding

Reviewer: ```suggestion
domain) must point to the same memory address as
```

Author: I believe a memory address is compared to another memory address here (not a pointer to the memory address it is supposed to point to). Could you clarify?

Reviewer: You are right. Feel free to resolve.
